MODELING DECISIONS FOR HOSPITAL BED MANAGEMENT
A Review
Joaquim Matos1,2 and Pedro Pereira Rodrigues1,3
1Faculty of Medicine of the University of Porto, Al. Prof. Hernâni Monteiro, 4200-319 Porto, Portugal
2Faculty of Sciences of the University of Porto, Rua do Campo Alegre, s/n, 4169-007 Porto, Portugal
3LIAAD - INESC Porto, L.A. & CINTESIS - Center for Research in Health Technologies and Information Systems
Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal
{mim09017, pprodrigues}@med.up.pt
Keywords: Hospital bed management, Hospital capacity planning, Decision support systems, Decision support models.
Abstract: With today’s hospital demands and financial constraints, hospital inpatient bed management is becoming
increasingly complex. The use of decision support systems could enable hospital staff and health decision
makers to perform more focused management of the hospital inpatient beds, thus potentially reducing costs
and inpatient length of stay. A literature review was carry out on both PubMed and ISI Web of Knowledge
in order to identify studies evaluating the use of decision support systems when applied to hospital inpatient
bed management. Two different approaches were identified: one approach based on the use of mathematical
models to support the planning and allocation of hospital inpatient beds and another approach consisting in
the utilization of information technologies to support timely inpatient placement. It was perceived that
mathematical models could be safely used to model annual patient arrival rates and bed occupancy, thus
forecasting hospital/department bed demand and underlying cost structures/revenues. It was also perceived
that the use of bed management information systems provides hospital staff (administrative clerk, clinicians
and housekeepers) with the necessary information to timely assess performance measures based on the
hospital/department activity thus increasing resource effectiveness, optimizing established clinical
pathways, reducing inpatient length of stay and associated costs.
1 RATIONALE
With today’s hospital demands and increasing
financial constraints, efficient hospital inpatient bed
planning and allocation is becoming increasingly
difficult. In recent years, hospitals have engaged in
various cost-cutting efforts that include department
downsizing, the consolidation of small services and
the decrease of the average inpatient length of stay
(ALoS). The number of hospital inpatient beds is
usually determined by the hospital or by associated
health authorities using methods based on ratios
and/or target bed occupancy rates (Green and
Nguyen, 2001; National Audit Office, 2000; Nguyen
et al., 2005; Kokangul, 2008; Mackay and Lee,
2005; Millard et al., 2000). The optimal number of
hospital/department inpatient beds can be defined as
the number for which the following three criteria are
met (Nguyen et al., 2005):
? The number of unoccupied beds is not excessive,
to avoid resource misuse thus levering the efficiency
and maximizing revenues (productivity);
? The number of patients transferred to other
departments or other hospitals because of lack of
available bed is not excessive (security). Transfers to
other hospitals result in a lost of revenues while
transfers to other departments may cause the
placement in less appropriate units, compromising
the quality of care and possibly resulting in a
increase of costs (e.g. need for additional staff);
? One or more beds are available for unscheduled
admissions (accessibility).
The introduction/development of decision
support information systems, either based on
mathematical models or based on information
systems, could allow bed managers (and other staff
that hold responsibilities in the inpatient bed
management process) to perform a more focused
management of the hospital inpatient beds, either by
providing new planning forecast tools and/or tools
capable to timely-inform about current bed
occupancy/utilization, short-term levels of planned
504
elective admissions, likely emergency inpatient
admissions and likely inpatient discharges.
2 METHODS
A literature search was performed in December 2009
with the goal of identifying studies evaluating the
use of decision support systems when applied to
hospital inpatient bed management. The search was
conducted both on PubMed and ISI Web of
Knowledge resulting in a base data collection of 65
studies. Thirteen studies were excluded by lack of
available abstract or full text and 38 studies were
excluded after abstract and/or full text review (e.g.
studies that didn’t address explicitly hospital bed
capacity and/or hospital bed allocation management
subjects). The final size of the overall data collection
was of 14 studies. Ten studies (~71,4%) addressed
the use of mathematical models to forecast and/or
plan hospital bed capacity (Green and Nguyen,
2001; Nguyen et al., 2005, 2007; Kokangul, 2008;
Mackay and Lee, 2005; Millard et al., 2000;
Cochran and Roche, 2008; Gorunescu, McClean and
Millard, 2002; Belien and Demeulemeester, 2007;
Ridge et al., 1998). Four studies (~28,6%) addressed
the use of information technologies to support
inpatient bed management, currently under use
(Blair, 2005; Szabo, 2003; Reuille, 2004) or under
evaluation (Kannry et al., 2007). One literature
source with publication date in the current decade
(National Audit Office, 2000) was handpicked and
added to the overall data collection in order to
support theoretical and practical concepts
surrounding the bed management subject.
3 FINDINGS
From the analysis of the selected data collection
from both PubMed and ISI Web of Knowledge, it
was perceived that the subject under revision (the
use of decision support systems for hospital inpatient
bed management) can be undertaken by two
distinctive approaches. One approach is based on the
use of mathematical models to support the planning
and allocation of hospital inpatient beds. Another
approach consists on the utilization of information
technologies to support the timely-decision/timelyaction
of the hospital staff (administrative clerk,
clinicians and housekeepers) in order to facilitate
inpatient placement thus optimizing the bed
management process. The main conclusions and
recommendations extracted from the reviewed
studies are sketched in table 1.
The studies that addressed the planning and
allocation of inpatient beds by means of
mathematical models covered such diverse
techniques as: queuing models, stochastic models,
flow models and other general proposed models.
Different distributions of patient
arrival/department service rates were analyzed for
different department/unit profiles: geriatric
department (Gorunescu, McClean and Millard,
2002), intensive care unit (Ridge et al., 1998;
Cochran and Roche, 2008), intermediate care,
obstetrics/gynaecology and surgical departments
(Cochran and Roche, 2008) and paediatric intensive
care unit (Kokangul, 2008).
Mathematical distributions were originated from
data collections as diverse as: department historical
patient arrival rate/LoS, midnight census by
department, midnight bed holds by department and
patient billed nights by level of care. All of the
analyzed studies point out advantages in the use of
mathematical models to forecast department
demands in terms of allocating the right number of
beds. It was concluded that the mathematical models
also provide better information concerning cost
structures and revenue characteristics and how these
affect capacity and resource allocation decisions.
Given accurate data about the actual costs of
occupied and empty beds, modelling could be used
to balance the cost of providing excess standby beds
(accessibility), with the costs associated with
rejecting patients. Thus, the modelling approach
facilitates the provision of cost efficient and cost
effective services.
Four studies addressed the use of information
technologies to support and facilitate inpatient
placement. Reuille (2004) proposed a centralized
bed management system (Bed Control Report) based
on five Excel spreadsheets, dispersed by four
departments, were information was inputted by the
target department staff. Szabo (2003) describes the
use of the Bed Tracking System, developed by Tele-
Tracking Technologies, to support the bed
placement workflow and centralize bed status
information (bed released, bed in maintenance and
bed available), that is entered into the system by the
hospital staff (administrative clerk, clinicians and
housekeepers) using specific coded calls. A very
similar approach is described by Blair (2005) were
the BedCentral system, developed by MediLogistics,
is also used to centralize bed status information
entered by the hospital staff. Unlike the Bed
Tracking System, the information is inputted on both
MODELING DECISIONS FOR HOSPITAL BED MANAGEMENT - A Review
505
patient admission and patient discharge. Mobile staff
members use PDAs to generate, transmit and receive
information about bed status while other members
use department workplaces and/or an electronic
dashboard. It was concluded that the use of Bed
Tracking System resulted in a door-to-bed
improvement by nearly 30 percent and that the use
of BedCentral resulted in a reduction of the time
needed to perform bed maintenance from nearly two
hours to about 45 minutes reducing FTEs by 25
percent. The last analyzed study evaluated the use of
RFID technology to accelerate identification of
empty beds by assigning to each discharged patient a
unique RFID tag number that was read at the patient
departure time (the effective physical discharge). It
was concluded that the proposed system enabled the
identification of empty beds within an average of 25
minutes earlier when compared with the pre-existing
process (manual information recording in the ADT
system).
4 CONCLUSIONS
The analyzed mathematical models were in general
complex and didn’t address numerous internal and
external factors that may affect the provision of
hospital/department inpatient services, such as
staffing levels, multi-profile beds, requirements for
isolated beds and clinical pathways that are crossdepartmental
(e.g. multi-department beds). As such,
the models should be augmented by other
information to ensure a more comprehensive
understanding of the dynamics that arise from an
analyzed hospital/department. For general planning
and cost structures/revenue purposes, an annual
model of patient arrival rates and bed occupancy
(department service) may be sufficient. Models of
shorter duration, however, may be necessary to
reflect the changes in bed occupancy that occur
throughout the year.
Table 1: Main conclusions and recommendations extracted from the analyzed studies.
Information technologies Mathematical models
BedCentral has helped St. Luke's
Episcopal Hospital to maximize its
existing resources, e.g. ICU capacity
tuning, telemetry/high-dollar beds swift
filling and minimization of the time
required to clean rooms and transport
patients (Blair 2005)
The use of target occupancy levels, such as the
average length of stay (LoS), as the primary
determinant of bed capacity is inadequate due to
the unpredictable nature and distribution of
hospital admission rates and patient LoS over time
(Green & Nguyen 2001; Nguyen et al. 2005, 2007;
Kokangul 2008; Mackay & Lee 2005; Millard et
al. 2000; Ridge et al. 1998)
More sophisticated methodologies
should be considered to support
decisions that involve bed capacity,
e.g. methodologies that capture
population structure, organization
and resource use (Green & Nguyen
2001; Mackay & Lee 2005)
Bed Tracking System has improved
door-to-bed time and reduced the “holdtime”
by nearly 30%. It also lengthened
the time clinicians can spend with
patients
instead of trying to locate a empty bed
(Szabo 2003)
Stochastic and flow models could be used to
determine the optimum size of bed requirement,
the size of additional required resources (e.g.
workforce or facility planning) or to capture the
variation in bed occupancy (Kokangul 2008;
Mackay & Lee 2005)
Models should consider elective
patient scheduling, different levels of
care (e.g. ICU and HDU beds) and
semi-automated historical data
(Ridge et al. 1998)
The proposed RFID-based system
identified empty beds within an average
of 25 minutes earlier when compared
with the pre-existing process - manual
information recording in the ADT system
(Kannry et al. 2007)
Posterior financial/billing data, rather than the
census data commonly relied upon, yields the
true hospital bed demand as it estimates true
demand for service rather than merely the
service available to be offered
(Cochran & Roche 2008)
Seasonal bed demand patterns
should be considered when
evaluating bed management models
(Kokangul 2008, Cochran & Roche
2008)
There is a clear need to address both
the issue of capacity planning at each different
level of care within individual hospitals and also
relative levels of care across different hospitals
in a region (Ridge et al. 1998)
Additional parameters should be
included such as population rate,
staff/equipment requirements and
budget constraints, in order to
universalize stochastic models
(Kokangul 2008)
Conclusions Recommendations
HEALTHINF 2011 - International Conference on Health Informatics
506
Bed management systems based on information
technologies, supply hospital staff with the
information necessary to timely assess performance
measures based on the department activity, thus
increasing resource effectiveness, optimizing
established clinical pathways, reducing inpatient
length of stay and associated costs. However
performance measures could be biased because of
the implied cross reliance on hospital staff to timely
input patient/bed status information. The analyzed
systems rely too much on timely inputted
information in order to proper track
hospital/department bed status – current bed status
may not be the real bed status. In this sense, it is
recommended that these systems be integrated with
the hospital ADT (Admission/Discharge/Transfer)
information system in order to reduce human
interaction to the minimum. Yet, even after
performing this kind of integration, another problem
would still exist in the patient discharge process –
the time de-synchronization between the patient
department discharge and the manual recording of
that information in the ADT system. The suggested
RFID approach could provide a simple solution for
this problem.
REFERENCES
Kokangul, A. (2008). A combination of deterministic and
stochastic approaches to optimize bed capacity in a
hospital unit. Computer Methods and Programs in
Biomedicine, 90(1), 56-65.
Belien, J. and Demeulemeester, E. (2007). Building cyclic
master surgery schedules with levelled resulting bed
occupancy. European Journal of Operational
Research, 176(2), 1185-1204.
Blair, R. (2005). Capacity management: the bedrock of
efficiency. Health Management Technology, 26(9), 26,
30-31.
Cochran, J. K. and Roche, K. (2008). A queuing-based
decision support methodology to estimate hospital
inpatient bed demand. Journal of the Operational
Research Society, 59(11), 1471-1482.
Gorunescu, F., McClean, S. I. and Millard, P. H. (2002).
Using a Queuing Model to Help Plan Bed Allocation
in a Department of Geriatric Medicine. Health Care
Management Science, 5(4), 307-312.
Green, L. V. and Nguyen, V. (2001). Strategies for cutting
hospital beds: The impact on patient service. Health
Services Research, 36(2), 421-442.
Nguyen, J. M., Six, P., Antonioli, D., Glemain, P., Potel,
G., Lombrail, P. and Le Beux, P. (2005). A simple
method to optimize hospital beds capacity.
International Journal of Medical Informatics, 74(1),
39-49.
Kannry, J., Emro, S., Blount, M. and Ebling, M. (2007).
Small-scale Testing of RFID in a Hospital Setting:
RFID as Bed Trigger. AMIA Annual Symposium
Proceedings, 384-388.
Mackay, M. and Lee, M. (2005). Choice of Models for the
Analysis and Forecasting of Hospital Beds. Health
Care Management Science, 8(3), 221-230.
National Audit Office (2000). Inpatient Admissions and
Bed management in NHS acute hospitals.
Nguyen, J. M., Six, P., Chaussalet, T., Antonioli, D.,
Lombrail, P. and Le Beux, P. (2007). An objective
method for bed capacity planning in a hospital
department - A comparison with target ratio methods.
Methods of Information in Medicine, 46(4), 399-405.
Millard, P. H., Mackay, M., Vasilakis, C., Christodoulou,
G. (2000). Measuring and modelling surgical bed
usage. Annals of the Royal College of Surgeons of
England, 82(2), 75-82.
Szabo, P. (2003). Bed-der than ever. Pittsburgh hospital
uses automated bed tracking and control to speed
efficiency in its ED. Health Management Technology,
24(3), 58-59.
Reuille, R. (2004). Bed Control Report: A Computerbased
System to Track Patient Admissions Delayed or
Rescheduled Due to a Bed Shortage. The Journal of
Nursing Administration, 34(12), 539-542.
Ridge, J. C., Jones, S. K., Nielsen, M. S. and Shahani, A.
K. (1998). Capacity planning for intensive care units.
European Journal of Operational Research, 105(2),
346-355.
MODELING DECISIONS FOR HOSPITAL BED MANAGEMENT - A Review
507
View publication stats