I
SETTING THE STAGE
INDIA is one geographical entity. Yet, throughout her long and chequered history, she never
achieved political homogeneity.
From the earliest times, spasmodic attempts were made to bring about her consolidation. A
pioneering effort in this direction was made by the Magadhan kings, Bimbisara and Ajatasatru,
in the sixth century B.C. But it was not till about three centuries later that under the Mauryas,
and particularly Asoka, a large portion of India came under the sway of one emperor. The
Mauryan Empire lasted only for about a hundred years and after its disruption the country
again lapsed into numerous kingdoms. Nearly five centuries later, Chandragupta, and his more
illustrious son Samudragupta, brought the major part of the country under their suzerainty; and
Harsha, in the seventh century, was able to make himself the undisputed master of north India.
These and later attempts at political consolidation failed again and again for one chief reason:
the empires were held together almost entirely by the personality and might of the emperor.
The whole edifice crumbled when a line of 'supermen' came to an end.
Even under these emperors, a diversity of autonomous states constituted the mosaic of an
empire. The emperor claimed suzerainty over these rulers, who offered allegiance to him;
subordinated their foreign policy to his diplomatic moves; usually served him in war, and
offered him tribute; but who, in other respects, retained their sovereignty. Whenever the
authority of the Emperor weakened, the subordinate rulers asserted their independence. There
was a perpetual struggle for supremacy. Mutual jealousies and conflicts made the country an
easy prey to any organized invasion.
The Muslims were thus able to vanquish the Hindu kingdoms in north India. The first Muslim
conquest was in the eighth century, when the Arabs under Muhammad-ibn-Kasim conquered
Sind.
But it was the conquest of the Punjab by Mahmud of Ghazni in the eleventh century that
opened the gates of India to the Muslim invaders from the north-west. Muslim rule in north
India was founded in A.D. 1206, when Qutb-ud-din Aibak proclaimed himself the Sultan of
Delhi. From this date to 1526, the year of the downfall of the Sultanate, Delhi had as many as
five Muslim dynasties and thirty-three Sultans. These Sultans attempted, from time to time,
to extend their empire; and Ala-ud-din Khalji was the first of these Muslim rulers to conquer
practically the whole of India.
The Moghuls appeared on the scene in 1526, when Babur defeated the last Sultan of Delhi in
the Battle of Panipat. He also defeated the powerful Rajput confederacy in the decisive battle
of Khanua and so laid the foundation of the Moghul Empire. During the time of his grandson,
Akbar, the Moghuls reached the meridian of their glory.
Neither the Sultans nor the Moghuls did away with the system of subordinate rulers. In the very
condition of things it was impossible for them to have done so. It was Akbar who laid down the
basic principles governing the relationship between these rulers and the emperor. He asserted
his authority over them in the matter of succession and assumed to himself the power to
depose any ruler for disloyalty. The sovereignty and authority of the emperor was
8
unquestionable, subject to which however the subordinate rulers were as much despots in their
respective domains as their master.
The passing away of Akbar's great-grandson Aurangzeb in 1707 was the signal for the break-up
of the Moghul Empire. His protracted and costly campaigns in the Deccan for conquest of the
Muslim kingdoms of Bijapur and Golconda and for the subjugation of the Mahrattas had
denuded his empire of much of its resources. Moreover, his short-sighted policy of religious
intolerance had alienated the allegiance of the Hindus. Once his strong hand was removed,
the Moghul viceroys as well as the subordinate rulers began to assert their independence, and
political and military adventurers started hacking at the crumbling facade of the empire.
Within the incredibly short period of twenty years from Aurangzeb's death, Moghul power
had faded into 'an insubstantial pageant' and the country had fallen into a condition of
masterless disorder.
It must be emphasized that' not even in the palmiest days of the Hindu and Moghul empires did
the entire country come under one political umbrella. No greater achievement can be credited
to the British than that they brought about India's enduring political consolidation. But for this
accomplishment and the rise of national consciousness in its wake, the Government of Free
India could hardly have taken the final step of bringing about the peaceful integration of the
princely States. Today, for the first time in the country's history, the writ of a single central
Government runs from Kailas to Kanyakumari, from Kathiawar to Kamarupa (the old name of
Assam). To appreciate the full significance of this achievement, it is necessary to review in
broad outline how the British established themselves and built up the framework of princely
India.
After the disintegration of the Moghul Empire, the only power which seemed likely to step into
the breach was the Mahrattas. Shivaji had laid the foundations of a mighty kingdom; but this
pioneer of a resurgent Hindu empire had left no competent successor. After Shivaji's death, the
Peshwas (chief ministers to the ruler) gradually took over control. In the beginning they showed
promise of becoming the rallying force of the great Mahratta Confederacy.
But theirs was the story of the Hindu and Moghul empires over again. Intrigue and corruption at
the Peshwa's Court and perpetual wars between the Scindia and the Holkar disrupted Mahratta
unity. The Mahratta armies were tax-collectors by force and showed no discrimination between
the Hindu and the Muslim. The imposition of chauth and sardeshmukhi in conquered areas and
the collection of these exactions by the Mulkgiri forces brought upon them the sullen hatred of
the people.
Into this arena of confusion and unrest entered the British and the French. Both had come to
India for trade. The British had come earlier and had started factories in several coastal towns
in the name of the East India Company. This Company, the greatest mercantile corporation the
world has ever seen, had several advantages over its French rival and, in the bid for
supremacy, finally succeeded in ousting the French from the scene.
The British Empire in India presents the curious phenomenon of having been built by the agents
of the Company in India, at any rate during the initial stages, notwithstanding express
directions to the contrary from their principals. The only interest of the Court of Directors was
in trade and commerce and they frowned upon wars which ate into their profits. Treaties
entered into with Indian States in the early stages aimed at no more than the maintenance
of the Company's privileged position in trade against its rivals.
It was in the process of protecting its commercial stake in the country that Clive actually laid
the foundations of the British Empire in India.
9
At first the East India Company's agents in India were responsible only to the Court of Directors
who derived their power from Charters given to them by the Crown. So long as the Company
was interested merely in trade, these Charters were enough; but when it became a territorial
power some control by Parliament became necessary.
In Lord North's Regulating Act of 1773, the Parliament for the first time asserted its authority
and control over the Company's activities, both in India and in England. The Act converted the
Governor in Council in Bengal into a Governor-General in Council. The Governor-General had no
overriding powers over his council. The control of the Governor-General in Council over the
presidencies of Bombay and Madras was confined to the making of peace and war. In the words
of the Montagu-Chelmsford Report, the Act created a 'Governor-General who was powerless
before his own council, and an Executive that was powerless before a Supreme Court, itself
immune from all responsibility for the peace and welfare of the country — a system that was
made workable only by the genius and fortitude of one great man.'
That was Warren Hastings, the first Governor-General. He continued the work of Clive and,
indeed, left the British possessions in India much larger and more secure than he found them.
The Regulating Act was repealed by Pitt's India Act of 1784. A body was set up, known as the
Board of Control, to supervise the activities of the Court of Directors. It made the control of
the Governor-General over the presidency Governments effective. Later, by a supplementary
Act in 1786, the Governor-General was given powers to overrule his council in special cases; he
was also permitted to hold the office of Commander-in-Chief in addition to his position as
Governor-General. It was this three-fold augmentation of the powers of the Governor-General
that was responsible for the success which attended the efforts of the Marquess of Wellesley,
the Marquess of Hastings and Lord Dalhousie in India. As Lord Dalhousie piquantly put it: 'The
Governor-General is unlike any other Minister under heaven — he is the beginning, middle and
end of all.'
Fourteen years after the passing of Pitt's India Act, Wellesley came to India as Governor-
General. He was given the strictest injunctions to keep the peace, not to meddle with the
Indian rulers and to husband the depleted resources of the Company. He paid scant attention
to these injunctions. Wellesley was convinced, when he came to India and saw the state of
affairs here, that the British must become the one paramount power in the country. Towards
this end, he worked for the next seven years. Apart from his military achievements, his
greatest contribution was the institution of a policy of subsidiary alliances with the Indian
rulers. Under this system, the State accepting subsidiary alliance was to make no wars and to
carry on no negotiations with any other State without the Company's knowledge and consent;
the bigger States were to maintain armies commanded by British officers for 'the preservation
of the public peace' and their rulers were to cede certain territories for the upkeep of these
forces; the smaller States were to pay a tribute to the Company. In return, the Company was to
protect them, one and all, against external aggression and internal rebellion. A British Resident
was also installed in every State that accepted the subsidiary alliance.
The system of subsidiary alliances was Trojan horse tactics in empire-building: it gave the
Company a stabilizing authority vis-à-vis the States and because of this 'the Governor-General
was present by proxy in every State that accepted it.' Well-trained bodies of troops were
posted in strategic and. key positions without any cost to the Company