What Is The Internet of Things (IoT)

The Internet of Things may be a hot topic in the industry but it’s not a new concept. In the early 2000’s,
Kevin Ashton was laying the groundwork for what would become the Internet of Things (IoT) at MIT’s
AutoID lab. Ashton was one of the pioneers who conceived this notion as he searched for ways that
Proctor & Gamble could improve its business by linking RFID information to the Internet. The concept
was simple but powerful. If all objects in daily life were equipped with identifiers and wireless connectivity,
these objects could be communicate with each other and be managed by computers. In a 1999 article
for the RFID Journal Ashton wrote:
“If we had computers that knew everything there was to know about things—using data they gathered
without any help from us -- we would be able to track and count everything, and greatly reduce waste,
loss and cost. We would know when things needed replacing, repairing or recalling, and whether they
were fresh or past their best. We need to empower computers with their own means of gathering
information, so they can see, hear and smell the world for themselves, in all its random glory. RFID and
sensor technology enable computers to observe, identify and understand the world—without the
limitations of human-entered data.”
1 At the time, this vision required major technology improvements. After all, how would we connect
everything on the planet? What type of wireless communications could be built into devices? What
changes would need to be made to the existing Internet infrastructure to support billions of new devices
communicating? What would power these devices? What must be developed to make the solutions cost
effective? There were more questions than answers to the IoT concepts in 1999.
Today, many of these obstacles have been solved. The size and cost of wireless radios has dropped
tremendously. IPv6 allows us to assign a communications address to billions of devices. Electronics
companies are building Wi-Fi and cellular wireless connectivity into a wide range of devices. ABI
Research estimates over five billion wireless chips will ship in 2013.2 Mobile data coverage has improved
significantly with many networks offering broadband speeds. While not perfect, battery technology has
improved and solar recharging has been built into numerous devices. There will be billions of objects
connecting to the network with the next several years. For example,Cisco’s Internet of Things Group
(IOTG) predicts there will be over 50 billion connected devices by 2020.3
“An Introduction to the Internet of Things (IoT)” Copyright Lopez Research LLC 2

1 http://kevinjashton.com/2009/06/22/the-internet-of-things/
2 https://www.abiresearch.com/press/over-5-billion-wireless-connectivity-chips-will-sh
3 http://www.cisco.com/web/about/ac79/docs/innov/IoT_IBSG_0411FINAL.pdf
IoT describes a system where items in the physical world, and sensors within or attached to these items,
are connected to the Internet via wireless and wired Internet connections. These sensors can use various
types of local area connections such as RFID, NFC, Wi-Fi, Bluetooth, and Zigbee. Sensors can also have
wide area connectivity such as GSM, GPRS, 3G, and LTE. The Internet of Things will:
• Connect both inanimate and living things. Early trials and deployments of Internet of Things
networks began with connecting industrial equipment. Today, the vision of IoT has expanded to
connect everything from industrial equipment to everyday objects. The types of items range from gas
turbines to automobiles to utility meters. It can also include living organisms such as plants, farm
animals and people. For example, the Cow Tracking Project in Essex uses data collected from radio
positioning tags to monitor cows for illness and track behavior in the herd. Wearable computing and
digital health devices, such as Nike+ Fuel band and Fitbit, are examples of how people are connecting
in the Internet of Things landscape. Cisco has expanded the definition of IoT to the Internet of
Everything (IoE), which includes people, places, objects and things. Basically anything you can attach a
sensor and connectivity to can participate in the new connected ecosystems.
• Use sensors for data collection. The physical objects that are being connected will possess one or
more sensors. Each sensor will monitor a specific condition such as location, vibration, motion and
temperature. In IoT, these sensors will connect to each other and to systems that can understand or
present information from the sensor’s data feeds. These sensors will provide new information to a
company’s systems and to people.
• Change what types of item communicate over an IP Network. In the past, people communicated
with people and with machines. Imagine if all of your equipment had the ability to communicate. What
would it tell you? IoT-enabled objects will share information about their condition and the surrounding
environment with people, software systems and other machines. This information can be shared in realtime
or collected and shared at defined intervals. Going forward, everything will have a digital identity
and connectivity, which means you can identify, track and communicate with objects.
IoT data differs from traditional computing. The data can be small in size and frequent in transmission.
The number of devices, or nodes, that are connecting to the network are also greater in IoT than in
traditional PC computing. Machine-to-Machine communications and intelligence drawn from the devices
and the network will allow businesses to automate certain basic tasks without depending on central or
cloud based applications and services.These attributes present opportunities to collect a wide range of
data but also provide challenges in terms of designing the appropriate data networking and security.
“An Introduction to the Internet of Things (IoT)” Copyright Lopez Research LLC
3
What It Means For Your Business?
IoT impacts every business. Mobile and the Internet of Things will change the types of devices that
connect into a company’s systems. These newly connected devices will produce new types of data. The
Internet of Things will help a business gain efficiencies, harness intelligence from a wide range of
equipment, improve operations and increase customer satisfaction. IoT will also have a profound impact
on people’s lives. It will improve public safety, transportation and healthcare with better information and
faster communications of this information. While there are many ways that the Internet of Things could
impact society and business, there are at least three major benefits of IOT that will impact every business,
which include: communication, control and cost savings.
The Three Cs of IoT
Communication. IoT communicates information to people and systems, such as state and health of
equipment (e.g.it’s on or off, charged, full or empty) and data from sensors that can monitor a person’s
vital signs. In most cases, we didn’t have access to this information before or it was collected manually
and infrequently. For example, an IOT-enabled HVAC system can report if its air filter is clean and
functioning properly. Almost every company has a class of assets it could track. GPS-enabled assets can
communicate their current location and movement. Location is important for items that move, such as
trucks, but it’s also applicable for locating items and people within an organization. In the healthcare
industry, IoT can help a hospital track the location of everything from wheelchairs to cardiac defibrillators
to surgeons. In the transportation industry, a business can deliver real-time tracking and condition of
parcels and pallets. For example, Maersk can use sensors to track the location of a refrigerated shipping
container and its current temperature.
Control and Automation. In a connected world, a business will have visibility into a device’s condition.
In many cases, a business or consumer will also be able to remotely control a device. For example, a
business can remotely turn on or shut down a specific piece of equipment or adjust the temperature in a
climate-controlled environment. Meanwhile, a consumer can use IoT to unlock their car or start the
washing machine. Once a performance baseline has been established, a process can send alerts for
anomalies and possibly deliver an automated response. For example, if the brake pads on a truck are
about to fail, it can prompt the company to take the vehicle out of service and automatically schedule
maintenance.
“An Introduction to the Internet of Things (IoT)” Copyright Lopez Research LLC
4
Cost Savings. Many companies will adopt IoT to save money. Measurement provides actual
performance data and equipment health, instead of just estimates. Businesses, particularly industrial
companies, lose money when equipment fails. With new sensor information, IoT can help a company
save money by minimizing equipment failure and allowing the business to perform planned maintenance.
Sensors can also measuring items, such as driving behavior and speed, to reduce fuel expense and wear
and tear on consumables. New smart meters in homes and businesses can also provide data that helps
people understand energy consumption and opportunities for cost savings.
How To Get Started
These are just a few examples of how IoT can help a business save money, automate processes and gain
new insight into the business. To reap the benefits IoT can provide, a business should address at least
the following four items:
1. Define what you’d like to learn from sensors. Over the next three years, a majority of the devices
purchased will have sensors and many existing items can be retrofitted with sensors. This will produce
a wide range of new data sources for people and systems to use to improve their lives and existing
business processes. Within a business setting, IT must define what types of information can be
obtained from these sensors and work with business leaders to define which business processes can
be improved with this new IoT information. For example, sensor data that highlights anomalies in
equipment vibration can be used to predict and avoid equipment failure.
2. Build an IOT network and security foundation. Many industrial IoT deployments have used
proprietary networks. Instead of building proprietary networks, IT should connect IoT devices with
standards-based IP networks. An IP-based network will help businesses deliver the performance,
reliability and interoperability that are required to support global IoT networks and connections with
partner ecosystems. Additionally, many businesses are focused on building security strategies for
smartphones and tablets, but this is just one aspect of the new mobile world. The proliferation of
connected sensors and equipment provides new security concerns. As IT embraces IoT, it needs to
ensure it has built safeguards into the solution including security procedures such as hardware
encryption, physical building security and network security for data in transit. Identity and
authentication structures will also need to be updated to support “things” as well as people.
3. Collect as much data as possible. Businesses that don’t plan carefully for IoT will be overwhelmed
with the volume and variety of data that IoT will generate. While each sensor may only produce a small
amount of data, a company will be collecting data from thousands to millions of sensors. Firms must
“An Introduction to the Internet of Things (IoT)” Copyright Lopez Research LLC
5
build a data collection and analytics strategy that supports this new torrent of information in a scalable
and cost effective manner. Big data technology, such as Hadoop and NoSQL, can give companies the
ability to rapidly collect, store and analyze large volumes of disparate IoT data. A company should
collect any data that is relevant to existing processes. If possible and cost-effective, a company should
also collect additional data that will enable the business to answer new questions in the future.
4. Review the size and scale of IoT providers. IoT is a complicated landscape with numerous
categories and many vendors within each category. The four main categories of an IoT solution are: a
sensor(s) and radio(s) that often sits in the machine, a M2M device-management platform, a solution
delivery platform and apps that enable IoT devices to report or act on data. While there are many
vendors, no single vendor offers a complete solution without building partnerships. As a firm begins its
IoT voyage, IT and line of business executives should build a cross-functional team to evaluate
strategic partners. The team should evaluate the financial position of the vendors, industry knowledge,
partnerships and breadth of offerings.
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. LOPEZ RESEARCH LLC
The development, preparation, and publication of this work have been undertaken with great care. While
we don’t anticipate any errors in this document, errors may occur. We’ll make every attempt to correct
any errors that are found. The publisher is not responsible for consequences that may ensue from use of
materials or information contained in this work. No part of this document may be reproduced in any
manner without the express written consent of Lopez Research, except in the case of brief excerpts in
critical reviews and articles. This document is available for reprints. To purchase syndicated research or
reprints of the report please email or call us at: sales@lopezresearch.com or (866) 849-5750
About Lopez Research
Lopez Research, founded in 2008, is a market research and strategy consulting firm that specializes in
how mobile technologies, big data, and cloud computing will create contextual “Right-time Experiences.”
The company’s mission is to understand the evolution of these trends, provide thought leadership, and
assist both enterprise and technology vendor clients in building winning market strategies. The
company's market insights are gained through client interaction, survey-based research and predictive
analysis. With a background in emerging business and technology trends, voice and data networking
technologies, and vendor and service provider selection, Lopez Research provides clients and readers
with the bridge between business leadership and technology adoption. www.lopezresearch.com
“An Introduction to the Internet of Things (IoT)” Copyright Lopez Research LLC
6